---
layout: default
title: Verification
type: Homework
number: 03
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2025-03-26
due_date: 2025-04-07 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

## Overview
This homework can optionally completed in partners. If you complete this lab with a partner, submit only once to gradescope.

For this assignment you will implement the Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland (DPLL) search algorithm for deciding the satisfiability of propositional logic formulae. This assignment consists of three parts. The first part will involve querying Z3 Theorem Prover, a SMT solver developed by Microsoft. In Part two you will implement DPLL for boolean satisfiability. 

## Resources
1. [Z3 Java Documentation](https://z3prover.github.io/api/html/classcom_1_1microsoft_1_1z3_1_1_context.html)
2. [Z3 Java Example](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3/blob/master/examples/java/JavaExample.java)
3. [Verified Deep Learning Text Book](https://verifieddeeplearning.com/nnv_book.pdf)

## Part 1. Querying Z3

In this part, you will use the Java Z3 library to query if a proposition is satisfiable. 

Setup steps: 
1. Download the [latest z3 release](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3/releases) - Download the latest zip file
2. unzip the release
3. cd into the newly unzip directory and run `mkdir bin`
4. Run `python scripts/mk_make.py --prefix=<your_z3_path>/bin --java` replacing `<your_z3_path>` with the absolute path to the directory you just unzipped.
5. run `cd build; make`
6. run `make install`. When this is done you should see a message that says "Z3 was successfully installed."
7. run `export Z3_DIR=<your_z3_path>` replacing `<your_z3_path>` with the absolute path to the directory you just unzipped.
8. run `export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:$Z3_DIR/bin/lib`
9. Download the starter code for part 1: `wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bmc-cs-software-analysis/383/refs/heads/main/hws/hw05/HW5Part1.java`
10. Download scripts I've provided for convenient compilation and execution:
`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bmc-cs-software-analysis/383/refs/heads/main/hws/hw05/compile.sh` and 

`wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bmc-cs-software-analysis/383/refs/heads/main/hws/hw05/run.sh` 

### Declaring Propositions
In Z3, we declare propositions using the `Context mkBoolConst` function. The argument is the string name of that boolean variable. 

Open the given code (HW5Part1.java line 89) to see an example of querying Z3 for a model of `(p V q) ^ (p V ~r)`. 
The code first creates a `Context` and `Solver`. It then creates Boolean consts for `p`, `q`, and `r`. Next it combines them using boolean operators with the `mkOr`, `mkAnd`, and `mkNot` methods. Lastly, it calls `solver.check()` to see if the given boolean proposition is satisfiable and `solver.getModel()` to return the satisfying assignment if it exists. 

### SAT or UNSAT
For each of the following propositions, use Z3 to decide if it is satisfiable. If it is satisfiable, report a valid interpretation. Otherwise, report UNSAT. 
1. ¬¬A
2. A∧¬A 
3. (A∨B)∧(¬A∨C)∧(¬B∨¬C)
4. (A∨B∨C)∧(¬A∨D)∧(¬B∨¬D)∧(C∨¬D)∧(A∨¬C)
5. (A∨B∨C)∧(¬A∨D)∧(¬B∨D)∧(¬C∨D)∧(¬D∨E)∧(A∨¬E)∧(B∨¬E)∧(C∨¬E)∧(¬A∨¬B)∧(¬B∨¬C)∧(¬A∨¬C)

For the following programs, use Z3 decide if a divide by zero error may occur. 
Report the proposition you encoded as well as a valid interpretation if it is satisfiable.

You can assume x, y, and z are integers. Hint: you might want to use the `Context` methods: `mkIntConst`, `mkEq`, `mkGt` and similar.

**Prog1:**
```java
if (x > y) {
    int res = x / y;
}
```

**Prog2:**
```java
if (y > 3 * x + 7) {
    if (x + y - z % 2 == 0) {
        if (z >= x) {
            int res = z / (z - x);
        }
    }
}
```

In your submision, report if the 7 given propositions are SAT/UNSAT and give a satisfying assignment if they are SAT. 
## 2. DPLL
In this part, you will implement the DPLL algorithm in Java to determine the satisfiability of boolean formulas in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF). 

### Requirements

1. **Input:** The input will be provided as a text file containing the CNF formula. The formula will be represented with single-letter variables and negation using the tilde (~) symbol. Clauses will be enclosed in parentheses, and literals within a clause will be separated by spaces. Clauses will be separated by spaces. For example, the clause (a v !b v c) ^ (!a v b) ^ (!c) will be represented as:
```css
(a ~b c) (~a b) (~c) 
```

2. **Output:** If the input is satisfiable, print a satisfying assignment. If not, print "UNSAT".

To begin implementation, download the skeleton file: `https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bmc-cs-software-analysis/383/refs/heads/main/hws/hw05/DPLL.java`

3. **Implementation:** Code is included to parse the input files into `List<List<String>> clauses` (lines  32-61). Your task is to implement the DPLL algorithm and the helper functions. Do not modify any of the given method signatures. 

First, recall the overall structure of the DPLL algorithm. For psuedo-code refer to the lecture slides. 

In your code, you will work with two data structures: `clauses` and `assignment`. `clauses` will keep track of the simplified boolean formula. It will begin equal to the parsed input file. If a clause is satisfied, it can be removed from `clauses`. `assignment` is the mapping from a variable to its boolean assignment.  

First, implement the helper methods `isClauseSatisfied` and `isFormulaSatisfied`. You can use these in your DPLL implementation. 

Now we are ready to implement the steps of DPLL. First, DPLL performs `unitPropogation` deduction. This deduction phase simplifies the formula by repeatadly finding and assigning values to unit literals (literals that appear alone in a clause) and propogating those assignments throughout the formula. Implement the `unitPropogataion` method first. At a high level, your `unitPropogation` method should do the following:
1. Scan the clauses for unit clauses
2. Assign any unit clauses to a True value (or False if it is a negation)
3. Propogate the assignment to simplify the forumla


Now let's implement the `dpll` method. DPLL alternates between two phases: *deduction* and *search*. For the deduction portion, make a call to your `unitPropogation` method. For search, the algorithm iteratively chooses variables and tries to replace them with `true` or `false`. This portion should call `dpll` recursively on the resulting formula. Make sure to include a base case.


## Sample Input and Output:
Test your code using the following sample input and outputs. Note that when a formula is satisfiable, there may be multiple satisfying assignments. If your algorithm outputs a different satisfying assignment it can still be correct. 

Sample input and output files are included in `https://github.com/bmc-cs-software-analysis/383/tree/main/hws/hw05`

After you're confident your DPLL implementation is correct, experiment how the runtime of your algorithm grows with the size of the formula. Plot the runtime and include a discussion of your findings in the report.  


## Submitting
Submit the following files to the assignment on Gradescope

1. Report: 
  - Answers to the 7 formula in part 1. 
  - DPLL Runtime plot and discussion

2. Source files:
   - `HW5_Part1.java`   
   - `DPLL.java`   


This assignment was adapted from Baojian Hua's Formal Methods Foundation course at USTC.
